# Master-Thesis: Intertemporal and Heterogeneous Effects of Lockdown Mandates on Violent Crime in Chile

This thesis studies dynamic impacts on violent crime of lockdown imposition and removal during the COVID-19 pandemic across Chile's 346 municipalities. I provide estimates of dynamic impacts of lockdown entry and exit on five variables of violent crime, and explicitly explore the mechanisms behind this relationship. Estimates show an expected negative sign when lockdown is imposed and positive sign when the lockdown is lifted. The reduction of violent crime due to lockdown entry was predominantly larger during the first wave. The changes in violent crime trends during the COVID-19 lockdowns seem to be aligned with changes in mobility due to the restriction on social interactions and the increase of criminals’ search costs of potential victims. Lockdown imposition is associated with a decrease in employment during the first COVID-19 wave. However, an extended analysis reveals that unemployment may not be a mechanism through which lockdown impacted violent crime in Chile during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

## Data

I combined data from several sources to examine the effect of lockdown entry and exit on crime and test my hypotheses. Data on the exact dates of lockdown imposition and removal for each municipality from March 14th 2020 to May 3rd 2021 was manually gathered by Bhalotra et al. (2024). I continued the process until August 18th 2021, when the last lockdown was lifted. I obtained administrative data on COVID-19 infection rates from the Ministry of Science, Technology, Knowledge and Innovation.

For data on crime the source are the Official Statistics of Crimes of Major Social Connotation (DMCS), Domestic Violence (VIF), Incivilities and other facts reported by the Police of Chile to the Ministry of the Interior and Public Security. These statistics account for all criminal acts (police cases) recorded by the police during the period and are composed of formal complaints made by citizens to a police unit after the occurrence of the crime, plus crimes that the police become aware of when making an arrest in flagrante delicto, i.e. while the crime is occurring. I consider five crime groups: the aggregated DMCS, robbery, robbery with violence and intimidation, vehicle theft, and homicides. The variables are presented in cases per 100,000 inhabitants at the municipality-monthly level.

Municipality-daily data on mobility is obtained from the mobile phone dataset made available by Pappalardo et al. (2023), covering the period March to September 2020. I also model the data at the municipality-monthly level by using that dataset. I analyze three mobility indices: The Index of Internal Mobility, quantifying the amount of mobility within each municipality of the country; the Index of External Mobility which quantifies the mobility between municipalities; and the Index of Mobility, which takes into consideration both mobility within and between municipalities. All the three indices range in [0, ∞), where a value of 0 indicates no mobility at all. The three indices are normalized with respect to the number of users that reside in the municipality. For example, an Index of Mobility equal to 5 means that the number of movements within, to, or from that municipality is around 5 times higher than the number of users that reside in that municipality.

I use the number of employed individuals in the formal private sector at the municipality-monthly level as a measure to analyze the unemployment mechanism. I obtained this variable from the 20% random sample of affiliated workers to the Unemployment Insurance, data managed by the Pensions Superintendence of Chile. It is important to mention that the Unemployment Insurance’s target group are dependent workers from the formal private sector older than 18 years old and regulated by the Labor Code. Therefore, this sample is representative of the total affiliated workers to the Unemployment Insurance, but it cannot be extrapolated to the total population.
